+++
title = "Debian LXC and Docker in Termux"
date = 2025-05-08
draft = false
showTableOfContents = true
+++

## Purpose {#purpose}

This is to configure an Android device with a custom kernel to run a full LXC environment on external storage.
Unlike the chroot or proot configurations, this allows use of Docker to run containers, alongside systemd to manage services.
Therefore, this allows an Android device to run as close to a "full" Linux environment as possible (without virtualisation).


## Skills Demonstrated {#skills-demonstrated}

-   Linux / Bash Command Line Administration
-   SSH Hardening
-   Android Kernel Configuration
-   Container Networking Configuration
-   Troubleshooting, Decision-Making With Limited Information Available


## IMPORTANT NOTE BEFORE WE BEGIN! {#important-note-before-we-begin}

In order for Docker to work inside the LXC, I configured a custom kernel that mounts the `cpuset` groups of `mems` and `cpus` with the  `cpuset` prefix (`cpuset.mems` and `cupset.cpus` respectively), as standard Linux installations are meant to.

The default Termux LXC package has been customised to look for `mems` and `cpus` WITHOUT the `cpuset` prefix (and therefore will not run if they are mounted WITH the prefix), but the standard Docker installation (which is installed inside the LXC) looks for `mems` and `cpus` WITH the prefix, and will not run if they are mounted WITHOUT the prefix.
Therefore, I made a custom version of the Termux LXC package, changing the source code to remove that customisation, and then rebuilding the package accordingly.

The system does note that `systemd` is designed for kernels 4.15 or above, but the device I tested on, the Exynos variant of the Samsung s10e, is currently on kernel version 4.14, so it warns to expect unpredictable behaviour. As of writing, it works fine for my purposes.


## Prerequisites {#prerequisites}

-   A custom Kernel installed with all flags for Docker enabled (tested on Samsung s10e (Exynos) with [customised CruelKernel](https://github.com/thefriendlyenigma/s10e-chroot-docker-kernel) installed over the latest supported stock OS, which in this case is Android 12), AND [the `noprefix` option REMOVED from mounting the `mems` and `cpus` cgroups.](https://github.com/thefriendlyenigma/s10e-chroot-docker-kernel/commit/0954a5be78edec9a2d7b088f9847e297a8d6c52b)
-   A rooted device (tested with Magisk v27.0)
    -   Termux installed and granted root access
    -   `root-repo` and `tsu` installed inside Termux (to allow the use of the `sudo` command)
    -   A custom `lxc` package installed, configured to search for the `cpuset.mems` and `cpuset.cpus` cgroups - you can either use [my provided build](https://github.com/thefriendlyenigma/termux-packages/releases/download/v1.0/lxc_1_3.1.0-2_aarch64.deb), or [make the changes](https://github.com/thefriendlyenigma/termux-packages/commit/11016e27076e1296f4ca93b57ce573e4e51ea38b) and build it yourself on your own machine.
-   An external micro SD card formatted as `ext4`


### LXC on Internal Storage (do NOT need to perform this step if using SD card) {#lxc-on-internal-storage--do-not-need-to-perform-this-step-if-using-sd-card}

These steps are also applicable using the device's internal storage if there is no SD card available, but file-based encryption on the device can pose a challenge to the proper functioning of the LXC environment. In my experience, using a folder within `/data` as the lxc storage works (for example, creating the folder `/data/lxc`), but `/data` needs to first be remounted with the `nosuid` option in the Termux shell:

```shell
sudo mount -o remount,suid /data
```


## Step 1: Mounting Cgroups as v1 {#step-1-mounting-cgroups-as-v1}

Save [this script](https://github.com/thefriendlyenigma/android-lxc-scripts/raw/refs/heads/main/cgroups.sh) to an easily-accessible location (in my case, I saved it to the Termux home directory) and then run it as root. This mounts cgroups, which is what allows the isolation of processes in LXC.

[(Source of script)](https://old.reddit.com/r/termux/comments/1jjfvjr/i_get_this_error_when_trying_to_run_lxc_on_termux/mjn4sn6/)

Important: it's important to confirm that `/proc/self/mountinfo` does NOT mention "cgroup2". From my understanding, "cgroup2" being present means that the cgroups are mounted as v2, but the current Termux LXC is configured to only use v1 cgroups. Cgroups being mounted as v2 confuses the program and renders it unable to start.


## Step 2: Editing LXC Configuration Files {#step-2-editing-lxc-configuration-files}

By default, these should be at:

-   `/data/data/com.termux/files/usr/share/lxc/config/common.conf`
-   `/data/data/com.termux/files/usr/etc/lxc/default.conf`


### common.conf {#common-dot-conf}

Comment out the entire part that shows lxc.devices.allow/deny, then add above it:

```text
lxc.cgroup.devices.allow=
lxc.cgroup.devices.deny=
```

The default lxc config restricts the devices used by LXC, but on Android with its different device style to standard Linux machines, it unfortunately prevents LXC from booting entirely.
These configurations set both allow and deny lists to clear, making it so that LXC can boot on its own.

Add to the bottom:

```text
lxc.init.cmd = /sbin/init systemd.unified_cgroup_hierarchy=0
```

This configuration reminds the container that it needs to use the v1 version of cgroups.

[An example common.conf file is located here.](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/thefriendlyenigma/android-lxc-scripts/refs/heads/main/common.conf)


### default.conf {#default-dot-conf}

By default, this file's contents are:

```cfg
lxc.net.0.type = empty
```

`empty` should be changed to to `none`:

```cfg
lxc.net.0.type = none
```

-   `empty` means that by default, the Linux environments created won't have network access.
-   Changing the setting to `none` gives the Linux environments access to the network configuration of the host Android device.
    -   However, note that **additional configuration** still needs to be carried out on each Linux environment that is created, for the Android system to allow them network access.


## Step 3: Creating LXC {#step-3-creating-lxc}

The LXC **must** be created in an unencrypted location.

Example with Debian Bookworm LXC being installed to an sd card mounted at `/data/local/debian` and installing to `/data/local/debian/lxc`:

```shell
# Creating folder to store the LXC root
sudo mkdir /data/local/debian/lxc
# Installing the LXC environment to that folder
sudo lxc-create --dir=/data/local/debian/lxc -t download -n debian -- --no-validate -d debian -r bookworm -a arm64
```

If you are using internal storage, you need to create your folder (or folders) directly inside `/data`, NOT inside `/data/local`, because `/data/local` is an encrypted location.
In my case, because uninstalling an LXC environment deletes its entire folder, I've decided to create a parent folder for the LXC as a "marker", or reminder of where to make more.
It isn't necessary to follow this exactly - to my knowledge, you could directly create a folder called `/data/debian` and install the LXC there if you like.

```shell
# Creating a folder AND a subfolder:
# /data/lxc is like a 'buffer' - 'marking' a dedicated place to create LXC environments,
# that won't be deleted if this Debian LXC is uninstalled in the future
# /data/lxc/debian is going to be where the LXC environment will actually be installed
sudo mkdir -p /data/lxc/debian
# Installing the LXC environment
sudo lxc-create --dir=/data/lxc/debian -t download -n debian -- --no-validate -d debian -r bookworm -a arm64
```

`--no-validate` must be included in the command because Termux LXC package cannot use a keychain.

**IMPORTANT!!**

1.  The directory you install to needs to exist FIRST.
2.  If you are using externally mounted storage, the LXC directory should NOT be the root of the mounted storage. For example, if it is mounted at `/data/local/debian`, the LXC should be installed to a SUBFOLDER. This is because if you need to uninstall the lxc later, deleting it through `lxc-destroy` will try to delete the directory of the mounted device itself and fail.


## Step 4: Enabling Password Login {#step-4-enabling-password-login}

By default, the LXC will not allow you to login, and due to a quirk of Android, the `lxc-attach` command that is usually used to get around it will not work.
Therefore, you need to edit the password file of the LXC in Termux, **before** you actually boot the LXC.

In the case of the example where the LXC is installed to `/data/local/debian/lxc`:

```shell
sudo vim /data/local/debian/lxc/etc/shadow
```

By default, the line of the root user will look like below, with the `*` meaning that password login is not possible:

```text
root:*:20215:0:99999:7:::
```

Replace the  `*` with `paa5KD6arxLr2`

```text
root:paa5KD6arxLr2:20215:0:99999:7:::
```

This will change the password to `123456`.

Source: machine-translated version of <https://www.cnblogs.com/ifwz/p/17592111.html>

It will then be possible to login through providing the username `root` and the password `123456`:

```shell
sudo lxc-start -F debian
```

For security purposes, you MUST change the root user password immediately afterwards to a more secure password of your choosing through the `passwd` command.


## Step 5: Enabling Networking, Creating Standard User {#step-5-enabling-networking-creating-standard-user}

[Source for networking changes](https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/321491/android-chroot-networking-issues)

As with Chroot Linux installations on Android, the Android host by default will not allow any network access unless the user is part of the group with the ID `3003`.
Both the root and \_apt user need these permissions added to them - root to allow network access when executing root commands, and \_apt to allow package management.

```shell
# creating a group called "aid_inet" with group ID 3003
groupadd -g 3003 aid_inet
# changing the _apt user's primary group to 3003
# has to be the PRIMARY group, otherwise the default "nogroup" will override
usermod -g 3003 _apt
# Need to add to the root user as well
usermod -aG 3003 root
# log out and in for group to apply
exit
```

As per Linux best practices of ONLY using root when absolutely necessary (and using sudo for regular situations), a regular user should now be created.

In this example, creating a user called `user`, having the `aid_inet` group as the user's primary group so they have network access by default:

```shell
# Creating a user called "user", creating their home dir
useradd user -s /bin/bash -m
# Changing "user"'s primary group to 3003
usermod -g 3003 user
# Switching to "user"
su user
# Testing ping - should be successful
ping 1.1.1.1
```

The user must also be added to the sudoers file via `visudo`, to allow them to use `sudo` and perform administrative commands.

In my case, because I intend to exclusively use SSH key authentication (which I will cover in my next step), I'm adding in `NOPASSWD` to both root and user, meaning that the user will not need to enter in a password for sudo use.

I have changed the lines under `#User privilege specification` from:

```text
# User privilege specification
root    ALL=(ALL:ALL) ALL
```

to:

```text
# User privilege specification
root    ALL=(ALL:ALL) NOPASSWD: ALL
user    ALL=(ALL:ALL) NOPASSWD: ALL
```

Another aspect similar to chroot installations, is the system needing a DNS address assigned manually. This can be done through editing `/etc/systemd/resolved.conf` through a terminal text editor (such as `vim` or `nano`) with `sudo` permissions.

The line `DNS=` should be uncommented, and then filled in with a DNS address of your choice. `1.1.1.1` (CloudFlare) or `9.9.9.9` (Quad9) tend to be solid options.

[Here is an example of the resolved.conf file after adding DNS 1.1.1.1.](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/thefriendlyenigma/android-lxc-scripts/refs/heads/main/resolved.conf)

Restart the DNS service, then test the ping command using a hostname. The ping should be successful.

```shell
sudo systemctl restart systemd-resolved
ping www.google.com
```


## Step 6: Enabling SSH Access {#step-6-enabling-ssh-access}

Inside LXC, install `openssh-server`.
This should automatically configure the SSH service to start when the LXC boots.
Therefore, running `sudo lxc-start debian` would allow access from SSH directly rather than needing to run `sudo lxc-start -F debian` from Termux shell.
Because LXC broadcasts on usual SSH port rather than port 8022 like Termux does, it's possible to access both the LXC and the actual Android Termux shell via SSH through the same IP address.

NOTE: I HIGHLY recommend first setting up SSH public key access, disabling password access, through changing the line `PasswordAuthentication yes` to `PasswordAuthentication no` in `/etc/ssh/sshd_config` and then running `sudo systemctl restart ssh.service`.

In order to auto-start the LXC and SSH access to it on boot, there are two scripts I have made, depending on whether you use internal or external storage.

**Both presume that the name of the LXC is `debian`, so please edit the examples accordingly if you have configured your setup differently.**


### External Storage Autostart {#external-storage-autostart}

Save [this script](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/thefriendlyenigma/android-lxc-scripts/refs/heads/main/lxc-startup-external.sh) to `~/.termux/boot` and have it executable.
On boot, this will auto-mount the external storage, mount the required cgroups, and then start the LXC.

In addition to the name of the LXC, this also presumes:

-   the SD card block device is `/dev/block/mmcblk0`
-   the SD card is mounted to `/data/local/debian`


### Internal Storage {#internal-storage}

Save [this script](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/thefriendlyenigma/android-lxc-scripts/refs/heads/main/lxc-startup-internal.sh) to `~/.termux/boot` and have it executable.

On boot, this will remount the `/data` folder with the `suid` option (allowing use of `sudo` for standard users), mount the required cgroups, and then start the LXC.


## Step 7: Installing and Configuring Docker {#step-7-installing-and-configuring-docker}

Due to Android's networking restrictions, additional configuration needs to be carried out with how Docker is utilised.
Specifically:

1.  the Docker daemon needs to be manually started,
2.  Android does not support `iptables`,
3.  all containers must be run on the **host** network.

<!--listend-->

```shell
# Installing Tmux to allow background terminal sessions (dockerd needs to be started manually, then run in the background)
sudo apt install tmux
# Installing docker and docker-compose (so can run compose template files)
sudo apt install docker.io docker-compose
```

Create file `/etc/docker/daemon.json`, and set the option `iptables` to false - this is another quirk of Android, where Docker doesn't work on Android if the iptables option is set to true.

Contents of `/etc/docker/daemon.json`:

```json
{
        "iptables": false
}
```

Create new tmux session by running `tmux`, then run `sudo dockerd`. Once `dockerd` has started, detach from the session by pressing `Ctrl+B D`.

Run `sudo docker run hello-world` , the program should properly run.

**Note: These following examples with Jellyfin and Calibre-Web-Automated are just examples to test that the services work, not services that can permanently run. They do not have any permanent storage passed through. For actual permanent containers, I recommend utilising docker-compose.yml files.**

As stated above, you need to run containers with **host network mode**, i.e.,

```shell
sudo docker run --network=host jellyfin/jellyfin
```

Otherwise, you will NOT be able to access the services on the network!!
Also, once more, due to Android's networking restrictions, if a container does not run with the current user's PGID (Process Group ID) by default, such as `calibre-web-automated`, you _must_ change the GID to 3003, otherwise the container will not have permission to even _start_ a server.

```shell
docker run -e PGID=3003 --network=host crocodilestick/calibre-web-automated:latest
```

As per usual Docker practices, add your user to the `docker` group if you would like to run the docker client without needing `sudo`:

```shell
sudo usermod -aG docker user
```

Then log out and in for it to take effect.

**Please note that you do still need to run `dockerd` as sudo.**


### Dockerd Autostart {#dockerd-autostart}

I have found that `dockerd` autostarting or not can be inconsistent. Sometimes it starts up on its own, sometimes it does not start up on its own (the reason for the latter being that the systemd service somehow does not detect the `iptables=false` flag. Therefore, if you find that `dockerd` does not run on restarting your device or the LXC container, run `sudo dockerd` in a tmux session and then detach from it with `Ctrl+B D`.


## Step 8 (OPTIONAL): General Linux QOL Features {#step-8--optional--general-linux-qol-features}

These are not necessary for LXC to function, but they are nice to have.
Install `command-not-found` so have better information if a command doesn't work

```shell
sudo apt install command-not-found
sudo apt-file update
```

Need to log out and in to take effect.

Install `apt-utils` so that packages can be installed more efficiently (configuration can occur BEFORE installation rather than after)
[(Source)](https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/629112/what-does-delaying-package-configuration-since-apt-utils-is-not-installed-tru)

```shell
sudo apt install apt-utils
```


## Note regarding shutdown and reboot commands {#note-regarding-shutdown-and-reboot-commands}

Unlike a chroot environment, where power-related commands simply fail, running `sudo shutdown now` or `sudo reboot now`  inside the LXC will work. However, they don't actually power off or reboot the host device, it's more akin to restarting a Virtual Machine.
